[Music]
narcotics traffickers and the Contras
introduction the initial committee
investigation into the international
drug trade which began in April 1986
focused on allegations that Senator John
F Carey had received of illegal gun
running and narcotics trafficking
associated with the Contra war against
Nicaragua as the committee proceeded
with its investigation significant
information began surfacing concerning
the operations of international
narcotics traffickers particularly
relating to the Colombian based cocaine
cartels as a result the decision was
made to incorporate the contra of
related allegations into a broader
investigation concerning the
relationship between foreign policy
narcotics trafficking and law
enforcement while the Contra drug
question was not the primary focus of
the investigation the subcommittee
uncovered considerable evidence relating
to the contra network which
substantiated many of the initial
allegations laid out before the
committee in the spring of 1986 on the
basis of this evidence it is clear that
individuals who provided support for the
Contras were involved in drug
trafficking the supply network of the
Contras was used by drug trafficking
organizations and elements of the
Contras themselves knowingly received
financial and material assistance from
drug traffickers in each case one or
another agency of the US government had
information regarding the involvement
either while it was occurring or
immediately thereafter the subcommittee
found that the Contra drug links
included involvement and narcotics
trafficking by individuals associated
with the Contra movement participation
of narcotics traffickers and Contras
supply operations through business
relationships with contra organizations
provision of assistance to the Contras
by narcotics traffickers including cash
weapons planes pilots air supply
services and other materials on a
voluntary basis by the traffickers
payments
drug traffickers by the US State
Department of funds authorized by the
Congress for humanitarian assistance to
the Contras in some cases after the
traffickers had been indicted by federal
law enforcement agencies on drug charges
and others while traffickers were under
active investigation by these same
agencies these activities were carried
out in connection with contra activities
in both Costa Rica and Honduras the
subcommittee found that the links that
were forged between the Contras and the
drug traffickers were primarily
pragmatic rather than ideological the
drug traffickers who had significant
financial and material resources needed
the cover of legitimate activity for
their criminal enterprises a trafficker
like George Morales hoped to have his
drug indictment dropped in return for
his financial and material support of
the Contras others in the words of
Marcos aguado Eden pastores Air Force
chief quote took advantage of the
anti-communist sentiment which existed
in Central America and they undoubtedly
used it for drug trafficking end quote
while for some Contras it was a matter
of survival for the traffickers it was
just another business deal to promote
and protect their own operations to the
executive branch response to contra drug
charges in the wake of press accounts
concerning links between the Contras and
drug traffickers beginning December 1985
with a story by The Associated Press
both houses of the Congress began to
raise questions about the drug-related
allegations associated with the Contras
causing a review in the spring of 1986
of the allegations by the State
Department in conjunction with the
Justice Department and relevant US
intelligence agencies following that
review the State Department told the
Congress in April 1986 that it had at
that time quote eviden
of a limited number of incidents in
which known drug traffickers tried to
establish connections with Nicaraguan
resistance groups end quote according to
the Department quote these attempts for
the most part took place during the
period when the resistance was receiving
no US funding and was particularly hard
pressed for financial support end quote
the report acknowledged that quote drug
traffickers were attempting to exploit
the desperate conditions end quote in
which the Contras found themselves the
department had suggested that while
individual members of the Contra
movement might have been involved their
drug trafficking was quote without the
authorization of resistance leaders end
quote following further press reports
linking Contras supply operations to
narcotics and inquiries from the Foreign
Relations Committee to the State
Department concerning these links the
State Department issued a second
statement to the Congress concerning the
allegations on July 24th 1986 in this
report the State Department said quote
the available evidence points to
involvement with drug traffickers by a
limited number of persons having various
kinds of affiliations with or political
sympathies for the resistance groups and
quote a year later in August 1987 the
CIA's Central American Task Force chief
became the first US official to revise
that assessment to suggest instead that
the links between Contras on the
southern front and Costa Rica to
narcotics trafficking was in fact far
broader than that acknowledged by the
State Department in 1986 appearing
before the iran-contra committees the
CIA Central American Task Force chief
testified quote with respect to drug
trafficking by the resistance forces it
is not a couple of people it is a lot of
people end quote
the CIA's chief of the Central American
task force went on to say quote
we knew that everybody around Pastora
was involved in cocaine his staff and
friends redacted they were drug
smugglers or involved in drug smuggling
end quote
the Justice Department was slow to
respond to the allegations regarding
links between drug traffickers and the
Contras in the spring of 1986 even after
the State Department was acknowledging
there were problems with drug
trafficking in association with contra
activities on the southern front the
Justice Department was adamantly denying
that there was any substance to the
narcotics allegations at the time the
FBI had significant information
regarding the involvement of narcotics
traffickers in contra operations and
Neutrality Act violations the failure of
US law enforcement and intelligence
agencies to respond properly to
allegations concerning criminal activity
relating to the Contras was demonstrated
by the handling of the committee's own
investigation by the Justice Department
and the CIA in the spring of 1986 on May
6th 1986 a bipartisan group of committee
staff met with representatives of the
Justice Department FBI DEA CIA and State
Department to discuss the allegations
that Senator Kerry had received
information of neutrality Act violations
gun running and drug trafficking in
association with contra organizations
based on the southern front in Costa
Rica and the days leading up to the
meeting Justice Department spokesman
were stating publicly that quote the FBI
had conducted an inquiry into all of
these charges and none of them have any
substance end quote
at that meeting Justice Department
officials privately contradicted the
numerous public statements from the
department that these allegations had
been investigated thoroughly and were
determined to be without foundation the
Justice Department officials at the
meeting said the public statements by
Justice were inaccurate the Justice
officials confirmed there were ongoing
neutrality
investigations in connection with the
allegations raised by Senator Kerry at
the same meeting representatives of the
CIA categorically denied that the
Neutrality Act violations raised by the
committee staff had in fact taken place
citing classified documents which the
CIA did not make available to the
committee in fact at the time the FBI
had already assembled substantial
information confirming the Neutrality
Act violations including admissions by
some of the persons involved indicating
that crimes had taken place in August
1986 Senator Richard Lugar then chairman
of the committee and the ranking member
senator Claiborne Pell wrote the Justice
Department requesting information on 27
individuals and organizations associated
with the Contras concerning allegations
of their involvement in narcotics
trafficking and illegal gun running the
Justice Department refused to provide
any information in response to this
request on the grounds that the
information remained under active
investigation and that the committee's
quote rambling through open
investigations gravely risks
compromising those efforts end quote
on October 5th 1988 the subcommittee
received sworn testimony from the Miami
prosecutor handling the neutrality and
gun-running cases that he had been
advised that some officials in the
Justice Department had met in 1986 to
discuss how to undermine Senator Kerry's
attempts to have hearings regarding the
allegations the subcommittee took a
number of depositions of Justice
Department personnel involved in
responding to the committee
investigation or in prosecuting
allegations stemming from the
committee's investigation
each denied participating in any
agreement to obstruct or interfere with
a congressional investigation in order
to place in their proper perspective the
attempts to interfere with or undermine
the committee investigation a lengthy
chronology has been prepared which
appears at a pending
a of this report three the guns and drug
smuggling infrastructure develops covert
war insurgency and drug trafficking
frequently go hand in hand without
regard to ideology or sponsorship
General Paul Gorman testified that the
use of narcotics profits by armed
resistance groups was commonplace Gorman
stated further that quote if you want to
move arms or munitions in Latin America
the established networks are owned by
the cartels it has lent itself to the
purposes of terrorists of saboteurs of
spies of insurgents and subversives end
quote
DEA assistant administrator David West
rate said of the Nicaraguan war quote it
is true that people on both sides of the
equation and the Nicaraguan war were
drug traffickers and a couple of them
were pretty significant end quote
drug trafficking associated with
revolution in Nicaragua began during the
late 1970s with the Sandinistas attempt
to overthrow the regime of anastasio
somoza debayle a at the time the
Sandinistas were supported by most
governments in the region those
governments helped provide the FSLN with
the money weapons and the sanctuary they
needed to overthrow Somoza costa rica
which has dozens of unsupervised air
strips near the Nicaraguan border became
an important supply and staging area for
the Sandinistas these air strips were
used by Noriega and others for shipments
of weapons to the Sandinistas former
senior Costa Rican law enforcement
officials told the subcommittee they
were instructed to keep their narcotics
investigators away from the Nicaraguan
border during the sandanista revolution
even when they had received hard
information about drugs on the aircraft
delivering weapons the officials an
effort to avoid controversy regarding
the war
toward the tips and let the flights go a
number of Costa Ricans became suppliers
for the Sandinistas these included I'm a
PK Guerra who owned a crop dusting
service and a related aircraft support
business in northern Costa Rica Guerra
refueled and repaired the planes which
came from Panama loaded with Cuban
weapons for the Sandinistas garras
crop-dusting business was excellent
cover for the movement of aviation fuel
to the dozens of remote air strips they
used without arousing the suspicions of
Costa Rican authorities when the
sandanista insurgency succeeded in 1979
smuggling activity in northern Costa
Rica did not stop surplus weapons
originally stored in Costa Rica for use
by the Sandinistas were sold on the
black market in the region some of these
weapons were shipped to the Salvadoran
rebels from the same air strips in the
same planes flown by the same pilots who
had previously worked for the
Sandinistas Costa Rican law enforcement
authorities said that the drug
trafficking through northern Costa Rica
continued as well they said that their
police units lacked the men the
communications equipment and the
transport to close down the air strips
and seize weapons and drugs
wernher lots a Costa Rican pilot serving
sentence for drug smuggling testified
that there was little the Costa Rican
government could do to deal with the
continuing drug trafficking quote Costa
Rica has got only civil guards underpaid
and easily bought to be very clear our
guard down there is barefoot and you're
talking about 50 men to cover 400
kilometers maybe endquote
for drug trafficking and the covert war
when the southern front against the
sandanista government in Nicaragua was
established in 1983 Costa Rica remained
ill-equipped to deal with the threat
posed by the Colombian drug cartels then
as now the country too
not have a military it's law enforcement
resources remain limited and its radar
system still so poor that Contra supply
planes could fly in and out of the
clandestine strips without being
detected
following their work on behalf of the
Sandinistas and the Salvadoran rebels
the Colombian and Panamanian drug
operatives were well positioned to
exploit the infrastructure now serving
and supplying the Contras southern front
this infrastructure was increasingly
important to the drug traffickers as
this was the very period in which the
cocaine trade to the u.s. from Latin
America was growing exponentially in the
words of Karol preto an officer of the
our day contra organization of Eden
Pastora on the southern front quote drug
traffickers approaches political groups
like our day trying to make deals that
would somehow camouflage or cover-up
their activities end quote
the head of the Costa Rican Air Force
and personal pilot to to Costa Rican
Presidents Werner Lotz explained the
involvement of drug traffickers with the
Contras in the early days of the
establishment of the southern front as a
consequence of the Contras lack of
resources quote there was no money there
were too many leaders and too few people
to follow them and everybody was trying
to make money as best they could and
quote the logic of having drug money pay
for the pressing needs of the Contras
appealed to a number of people who
became involved in the covert war indeed
senior US policymakers were not immune
to the idea that drug money was a
perfect solution to the Contras funding
problems as DEA officials testified last
July before the House Judiciary
Subcommittee on crime
Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North
suggested to the DEA in June 1985 that
one and a half million dollars in drug
money carried aboard a plane piloted by
DEA informant Barry seal and generated
in a sting of the Medellin Cartel and
sandanista officials be provided to the
Contras while the suggestion was
rejected by the DEA the fact that it was
made highlights the potential appeal of
drug profits for persons engaged in
covert activity lots said that contra
operations on the southern front were in
fact funded by drug operations he
testified that weapons for the Contras
came from Panama on small planes
carrying mixed loads which included
drugs
the pilots unloaded the weapons refueled
and headed north toward the US with
drugs
the pilots included Americans
Panamanians and Colombians and
occasionally uniformed members of the
Panamanian Defense Forces drug pilots
soon began to use the contra air strips
to refuel even when there were no
weapons to unload they knew that the
authorities would not check the air
strips because the war was protected the
problem of drug traffickers using the
air strips also used to supply the
Contras persisted through 1985 and 1986
by the summer of 1986 it became a
significant concern to the US government
officials who were involved in the
covert contra supply operations
undertaken during the Boland Amendment
period as then CIA station chief Tomas
Castillo testified to the iran-contra
committees US ambassador to Costa Rica
Luis Thames wanted to place guards on
the secret contra supply airstrip at
Santa Elena and Costa Rica to avoid
quote having drug traffickers used that
site and this was a continuing concern
during the period of June July and
August
end quote the concern highlights the
degree to which the infrastructure used
by the Contras and that used by drug
traffickers was potentially
interchangeable even in a situation in
which the US government had itself
established and maintained the airstrip
involved five the pilots
pilots who made combined contra weapons
drug flights through the southern front
included Gerardo Duran a Costa Rican
pilot in the airplane parts supply
business Duran flew for a variety of
contra organizations on the southern
front including those affiliated with
Alfonso rabello Fernando el Negro
Chamorro and Eden Pastora before US
officials insisted that the Contras
sever their ties from Duran because of
his involvement with drugs Duran was
convicted of narcotics trafficking in
Costa Rica in 1987 and jailed Gary Wayne
bets nur drug pilot who worked for
convicted smuggler George Morales bets
nur testified that twice in 1984 he flew
weapons for the Contras from the u.s. to
northern Costa Rica and returned to the
United States with loads of cocaine bets
nur is presently serving a lengthy
prison term for drug smuggling Jose ship
owned Rabello the head of UD n fa RN Air
Force on the southern front row Bello
turned to narcotics trafficking and
reselling goods provided to the Contras
by the u.s. six US government funds and
companies with drug connections the
State Department selected four companies
owned and operated by narcotics
traffickers to supply humanitarian
assistance to the Contras the companies
were set co-heir a company established
by Honduran drug trafficker ramn
matta-ballesteros D AXA a Miami based
air company operated as the headquarters
of a drug trafficker enterprise for
convicted drug traffickers Floyd Carlton
and Alfredo Caballero
free Jerry for cosa de Puntarenas a firm
owned and operated by Cuban American
drug traffickers vortex an air service
and supply company partly owned by
admitted drug trafficker Michael Palmer
in each case prior to the time that the
State Department entered into contracts
with the company federal
law enforcement had received information
that the individuals controlling these
companies were involved in narcotics
officials at NHA OH told Gao
investigators that all the supply
contractors were to have been screened
by US intelligence and law enforcement
agencies prior to they're receiving
funds from State Department on behalf of
the Contras to ensure that they were not
involved with criminal activity
neither the GAO nor the NH AO were
certain whether or not that had actually
been done the payments made by the State
Department to these four companies
between January and August 1986 or as
follows set Co for air transport
services one hundred eighty five
thousand nine hundred $24.25 died AXA
for airplane engine parts forty one
thousand one hundred $20.90
free Jerry fee Coast day Puntarenas as a
broker supplier for various services to
Contras on the southern front two
hundred sixty one thousand nine hundred
thirty two dollars vortex for air
transport services three hundred
seventeen thousand four hundred
twenty-five dollars seventeen cents
total eight hundred six thousand four
hundred $1.20 a number of questions
arise as a result of the selection of
these four companies by the State
Department for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to the Contras
to which the subcommittee has been
unable to obtain clear answers who
selected these firms to provide services
to the Contras paid for with public
funds and what criteria were used for
selecting them where any US officials in
the CIA NSC or State Department aware of
the narcotics allegations associated
with any of these companies if so why
were these firms permitted to receive
public funds on behalf of the Contras
why were contra suppliers not checked
against federal law enforcement records
that would have shown them to be either
under active investigation as drug
traffickers or in the case of Dai AXA
actually under indictment ambassador
Robert dueling director of the
Nicaraguan humanitarian assistance
organization NHA oh who is responsible
for the operation of the program was
unable to recall how these companies
were selected when questioned by Senator
Kerry in April 1988 ambassador doom Ling
also could not recall whether or not the
contractors had in fact been checked
against law enforcement records prior to
receiving funds from the State
Department in previous testimony before
the iran-contra committees ambassador
doom Ling had recalled that NH AO had
been directed by Lieutenant Colonel
Oliver North to continue quote the
existing arrangements of the resistance
movement and quote and choosing
contractors at best these incidents
represent negligence on the part of US
government officials responsible for
providing support to the Contras at
worst it was a matter of turning a blind
eye to the activities of companies who
use legitimate activities as a cover for
their narcotics trafficking a set Co hon
do Caribe before being chosen by the
State Department to transport goods on
behalf of the Contras from late 1985
through mid 1986 set Co had a
long-standing relationship with the
largest of the Contra groups the
Honduras based fdn beginning in 1984 set
Co was the principal company used by the
Contras in Honduras to transport
supplies and personnel for the fdn
carrying at least a million rounds of
ammunition food uniforms and other
military supplies for the Contras from
1983 through 1985 according to testimony
before the iran-contra committees by fdn
leader Adolfo Calero said Co received
funds for contra supply operations from
the contra accounts established by
oliver north US law enforcement records
state that set Co was established by
Honduran cocaine trafficker one
matta-ballesteros whose 1988 extradition
from Honduras to the United States in
connection with drug trafficking charges
caused riots outside the US Embassy in
Tegucigalpa for example a 1983 customs
investigative report states that quote
set Co stands for services eject Evo's
turistas commander and is headed by one
ramn matta-ballesteros a class-one DEA
violator and quote the same report
states that according to the Drug
Enforcement Agency quote set Co aviation
as a corporation formed by American
businessmen who were dealing with Mata
and are smuggling narcotics into the
United States end quote
one of the pilots selected to fly contra
supply missions for the fdn forset Co
was Frank moss has been under
investigation as an alleged drug
trafficker since 1979 Moss has been
investigated although never indicted for
narcotics offenses by ten different law
enforcement agencies in addition to
flying contra supply missions through
set Co Maas formed his own company in
1985 hon do Caribe which also flew
supplies to the Contras including
weapons and ammunition purchased from RM
equipment an arms company controlled by
Ronald Martin and James McCoy the F D
ends arrangement with moss and Hahn do
Caribe was pursuant to a commercial
agreement between the FD NS chief supply
officer Mario Calero and moss under
which Calero was to receive an ownership
interest in mosses company the
subcommittee received documentation that
one Moss plain ADC for in nine zero two
zero one was used to move contra Goods
from the United States to Honduras on
the basis of information alleging that
the plane was being used for drug
smuggling the Customs Service obtained a
court order to place a concealed
transponder on the plane a second D
see for controlled by mas was chased off
the west coast of Florida by the Customs
Service while it was dumping what
appeared to be a load of drugs according
to law enforcement personnel when the
plane landed at Port Charlotte no drugs
were found on board but the planes
registration was not in order and its
last known owners were drug traffickers
law enforcement personnel also found an
address book aboard the plane containing
among other references the telephone
numbers of some contra officials and the
Virginia telephone number of Robert Owen
Oliver North's courier a law enforcement
inspection of the plane revealed the
presence of significant marijuana
residue DEA seized the aircraft on March
16 1987 be free go terrific OHS day
Puntarenas free go terrific OHS day
Puntarenas is a Costa Rican seafood
company which was created as a cover for
the laundering of drug money
according to grand jury testimony by one
of its partners and testimony by ramon
me leon rodriguez the convicted money
launderer who established the company
from its creation it was operated and
owned by luis rodriguez of miami florida
and Carlos Soto and Ubaldo Fernandez two
convicted drug traffickers to launder
drug money Luis Rodriguez who according
to Massachusetts law enforcement
officials directed the largest marijuana
smuggling ring in the history of the
state was indicted on drug trafficking
charges by the federal government on
September 30th 1987 and on tax evasion
in connection with the laundering of
money through ocean hunter on April 5th
1988 Luis Rodriguez controlled the bank
account held in the name of free Jerry
fuko's which received 260 1937 dollars
in humanitarian assistance funds from
the State Department in 1986 Rodriguez
signed most of the orders to transfer
the funds for the Contras out of that
account Rodriguez was also president of
Ocean
an American seafood company created for
him by Ramone million Rodriguez ocean
hunter imported seafood it bought from
free sharifa Coast and used the
intercompany transactions to launder
drug money in statements before a
florida federal grand jury in connection
with a narcotics trafficking prosecution
of Luis Rodriguez Soto testified that he
knew Luis Rodriguez as a narcotics
trafficker who had been smuggling drugs
into the u.s. since 1979 Soto
also testified that they were partners
in the shipment of thirty five thousand
pounds of marijuana to Massachusetts in
nineteen eighty-two million rodriguez
told federal authorities about luis
rodriguez narcotics trafficking prior to
Milian Rodriguez's arrest in May 1983 in
March and April 1984 IRS agents
interviewed Luis Rodriguez regarding
ocean hunter drug trafficking and money
laundering and he took the Fifth
Amendment in response to every question
in September 1984 Miami police officials
advised the FBI of information they had
received that ocean hunter was funding
contra activities through narcotics
transactions and noting that Luis
Rodriguez was its president this
information confirmed previous accounts
the FBI had received concerning the
involvement of ocean hunter and its
officers and Contra supply operations
involving the Cuban American community
despite the information possessed by the
FBI customs and other law enforcement
agencies documenting luis rodriguez
involvement in narcotics trafficking and
money laundering the State Department
used free jury focus which he owned and
operated to deliver humanitarian
assistance funds to the Contras in late
1985 official funds for the Contras from
the United States began to be deposited
into the free sharifa COEs account in
early 1986 and continued until mid 1986
in May 1986
senator Kerry advised the Justice
Department Drug Enforcement Agency State
Department Nha oh and CIA of allegations
he had received involving Luis Rodriguez
and his companies and drug trafficking
and money laundering in August 1986 the
Foreign Relations Committee asked
Justice whether the allegations about
Luis Rodriguez were true and requested
documents to determine whether the State
Department might have in fact provided
funds to a company controlled by drug
traffickers justice refused to answer
the inquiry the indictment of Luis
Rodriguez on drug charges 18 months
later demonstrated that the concerns
raised by Senator Kerry to the Justice
Department and other agencies in May
1986 concerning his companies were
well-founded as the State Department had
in fact chosen companies operated by
drug traffickers to supply the Contras
si died AXA died AXA was an aircraft
dealership and part supply company
partly owned by the getter of family of
Costa Rica dye acts as president Alfredo
Caballero was under DEA investigation
for cocaine trafficking and money
laundering when the State Department
chose the company to be an NH AO
supplier Caballero was at that time a
business associate of Floyd Carlton the
pilot who flew cocaine for Panama's
general Noriega in an affidavit filed in
federal court in January 1985 DEA
Special Agent Daniel E Moritz described
working as an undercover money-launderer
quote for the purpose of introducing
myself into a criminal organization
involved in importing substantial
quantities of cocaine into the United
States from South America end quote
that organization was the Carleton
Caballero partnership according to agent
Moretz the cocaine traffickers used died
AXA offices quote as a location for
planning smuggling ventures for
assembling and distributing large cash
proceeds of narcotics transactions and
for placing telephone calls in
furtherance
of the smuggling ventures end quote from
March 1985 until January 1986 Moritz
received approximately 3.8 million
dollars in US currency from members of
this organization quote to be
distributed primarily in the form of
wire transfers around the world end
quote
most of the 3.8 million dollars was
delivered in dye axes offices Moretz met
both Alfredo Caballero and Floyd Carlton
in March of 1985 Moretz had previously
learned from a confidential informant
that Carleton was a quote major cocaine
trafficker from Panama who frequented
died AXA and was a close associate of
Alfredo Caballero end quote
the informant added that quote Caballero
provided aircraft for Floyd Carlton
Cassius's cocaine smuggling ventures end
quote and that Caballero allowed Carlton
and quote members of his organization to
use Die AXA offices as a location for
planning smuggling ventures for
assembling and distributing large cash
proceeds of narcotics transactions and
for placing telephone calls in
furtherance of the smuggling ventures
end quote
Alfredo Caballero was described by the
informant quote as the man in charge of
operations for Floyd Carlton Cazadores
cocaine transportation organization end
quote other members of the group were
Miguel Alemany Soto who recruited pilots
and selected aircraft and landing strips
and Cecilia Suns battery ax the
confidential informant said that Sons
was a Panamanian quote in charge of
supervising the landing and refueling of
the organization's aircraft at air
strips on the Panama Costa Rica border
end quote and that he quote arranges for
bribe payments for certain Costa Rican
officials to ensure the protection of
these aircraft as they head north loaded
with cocaine and quote during 1984 and
1985 the principle
contre organization the fdn chosed i AXA
for intra account transfers the
laundering of money through dai AXA
concealed the fact that some funds for
the Contras were through deposits
arranged by Lieutenant Colonel Oliver
North the indictments of Carlton
Caballero and five other defendants
including Alfred Caballero Rose son
Lewis were handed down on January 23rd
1985 the indictment charged the
defendants with bringing into the United
States on or about September 23rd 1985
nine hundred pounds of cocaine in
addition the indictment charged the
defendants with laundering 2.6 million
dollars between March 25th 1985 and
January 13th 1986
despite the indictments the State
Department made payments on May 14 1986
and September 3rd 1986 totaling 41,000
120 dollars and 90 cents to dye AXA to
provide services to the Contras in
addition the State Department was still
doing business with dye AXA on its own
behalf six months after the company's
principles had been indicted court
papers filed in the case in July in 1986
showed that the u.s. embassies of Panama
and Costa Rica were clients of dye AXA
while dye AXA and its principles were
engaged in plea bargaining negotiations
with the Justice Department regarding
the cocaine trafficking and money
laundering charges u.s. embassy
personnel in Panama and Costa Rica were
meeting with one of the defendants to
discuss purchasing Cessna planes from
the company each of the defendants in
the dioxin case was ultimately convicted
on charges of importing cocaine into the
United States the sentences they
received ranged from 10 years for one
non cooperating defendant to nine years
for Floyd Carlton to three years
probation for Luis Caballero and five
years probation for his father died axes
owner Alfredo Caballero as
consequence of their cooperation with
the government d vortex when the State
Department signed a contract with vortex
to handle contra supplies Michael B
Palmer then the company's executive vice
president signed for vortex at the time
Palmer was under active investigation by
the FBI and three jurisdictions in
connection with his decade-long activity
as a drug smuggler and a federal grand
jury was preparing to indict him in
Detroit the contract required vortex to
receive goods for the Contras store pack
and inventory them at the time the
contract was signed for Texas principal
assets were two airplanes which Palmer
previously used for drug smuggling
vortex was selected by NHA Oh assistant
director Philip bouche ler following
calls among bouche ler Palmer and Pat
Foley the president of Summit aviation 7
the case of George Morales and FRS our
day in 1984 the contra forces under Eden
Pastora were in an increasingly hopeless
situation on May 30th 1984 Paz Toro was
wounded on May 30th 1984 Pastora was
wounded by a bomb at his base camp at la
penka Nicaragua close to the Costa Rica
border that same day according to our
day officer general preto aid to our day
from the United States was cut off
despite continued pressure from the
United States Pastora refused to place
his r-day forces under a unified command
with the largest of the contra
organizations the Honduras based fdn the
CIA considered Pastora to be disruptive
and unpredictable by the time the Boland
amendment cut off legal military aid to
the Contras the CIA had seen to it that
Pastora did not receive any assistance
and his forces were experiencing
desperate conditions although there are
discrepancies among the parties as to
when the initial meeting took place
Pastores organization was approached by
George Morales a Colombian drug
trafficker living in Miami who had been
indicted on narcotics trafficking
charges according to the State
Department report to the Congress of
July 26th 1986 quote information
developed by the intelligence community
indicates that a senior member of Eden
pastores Sandino Revolutionary front FRS
agreed in late 1984 with Morales that
FRS pilots would aid in transporting
narcotics in exchange for financial
assistance the fr-s official agreed to
use FRS operational facilities in Costa
Rica and Nicaragua to facilitate
transportation of narcotics
Morales agreed to provide financial
support to the FRS in addition to
aircraft and training for FRS pilots
after undergoing flight training the
fr-s pilots were to continue to work for
the FRS but would also fly narcotics
shipments from South America to sites in
Costa Rica and Nicaragua for later
transport to the United States shortly
thereafter Morales reportedly provided
the FRS one c-47 aircraft and two crated
helicopters he is reported to have paid
the sum of $100,000 to the FRS but there
was no information available on who
actually received the money and quote
the State Department said it was aware
of only one incident of drug trafficking
resulting from this agreement between
the Contras and Morales and that was the
case of contra pilot Gerardo Duran Duran
was arrested in January 1986 in Costa
Rica for his involvement in transporting
cocaine to the United States Duran was
an FRS pilot from 1982 to 1985 and
operated an air taxi service in Costa
Rica
according to Marco aguado and Carole
preto Duran would fly supplies to the
Contras on the southern front and he
would charge for each flight Robert Owen
courier for Lieutenant Colonel Oliver
North testified to the iran-contra
committees that he told north he thought
Carroll preto was involved in
trafficking drugs out of Panama and that
pastores pilot Marco aguado was also
involved the subcommittee was unable to
validate Owens claims Pareto vehemently
denied these allegations stating that he
believed the drug trafficking
allegations against Pastora
were the result of a CIA effort to
discredit him Morales testified that his
involvement with the Contras started in
1984 at the urging of Marta Healy the
widow of one of his drug pilots Richard
Healy Marta Healy's first husband was
Adolfo popo Chamorro the
second-in-command to Eden Pastora
in the FRS she came from a prominent
Nicaraguan family at the time of his
first contract Morales was under
indictment for marijuana smuggling he
testified that he thought by assisting
the contra cause his indictment would be
dropped Marta Healy introduced Morales
to popo gemoro Marco aguado and Octavia
noses are at a meeting in Miami
according to Morales he wanted to make a
deal he would help the contras with
their needs and quote they in exchange
would help me with my objective which
was solving my indictment and a quote
Morales believed that contra leaders
would help him solve his legal problems
because of their contacts with the CIA
on October 31st 1987 in San Jose Costa
Rica the subcommittee videotaped the
depositions of three contra leaders with
intimate knowledge of the Morales
relationship with Pastores organization
and video depositions the three were
catarrhal Preto Pastores head of
communications marco aguado Pastores air
force chief
octavia no say czar who along with his
brother Alfredo were political allies of
pastores at the time
a fourth Adolfo Papa gemoro
who is Pastores second-in-command in our
day testified in closed session of the
subcommittee in April 1988 Chamorros
testimony was taken in closed session by
the consent of the subcommittee at his
request dick McCall of Senator Kerry's
personal staff and an arrangement worked
out with gemoro and his attorneys
subsequently interviewed him in Miami
each denied knowing that Morales was
under indictment for drug trafficking
when they first met him at Marta Healy's
house in Miami Popo gemoro said that as
far as he knew morales was just another
rich Miami resident with strong
anti-communist feelings in addition all
three denied receiving more than $10,000
in cash from Morales the subcommittee
found that $10,000 was given to Popo
Chamorro to cover the cost of
transporting a c-47 owned by morales
which he donated to our day from haiti
to elope on go air force base in el
salvador while denying receiving funds
personally Prado aguado and say's are
each confirmed elements of Morales story
according to Prado Octavio no say czar
and his brother Adolfo allied themselves
politically with Pastora in the summer
of 1984 a decision was then made to send
Popo Chamorro
and Octavio no cesare to the United
States to look for funds in September
Popo gemoro returned to costa rica with
photographs of a dc4 and a howard plane
and told Pastora that they would get six
more planes including a navajo panther
from george morales Pastora told gemoro
that the c-47 was the most practical
plane for the Contras at the time and
Popo returned to Miami to arrange for
its transfer gemoro provided the
subcommittee with an aircraft purchase
order dated October 1st
1984 they notarized purchase order
provided that for the sum of $1 a
McDonnell Douglas dc-3 the civilian
designation for a c-47 would be
transferred to Marco aguado the order
was signed by George Morales as the
seller and by Marco aguado
as the purchaser in addition gemoro gave
the subcommittee a list of flights made
by that 747 to ferry arms from ill upon
go to Costa Rica and la penka between
October 18th 1984 and February 12 1986
some 156 thousand pounds of material
were moved from L o Pango to airfields
in Costa Rica of the 24 flights during
this period eleven were to LA penka on
the Nicaraguan side of the rio san juan
the subcommittee substantiated key
elements of the Morales story although
it did not find evidence that says our
gemoro or preto were personally involved
in drug trafficking first all witnesses
agreed that Morales gave our de ac-47
evidence of an association between them
is also provided by a customs document
this document provided the committee by
the US Customs Service shows that
Morales entered the United States from
the Bahamas on October 13th 1984 with
Marco aguado Octavio no Cesare and Popo
gemoro they carried $400,000 in cash and
checks which were declared by aguado
Chamorro
and Cesare they claimed that the checks
and money were returned to Morales after
clearing customs
aguado summarized the relationship
between the southern front Contras and
the drug traffickers in terms of the
exploitation of the Contra movement by
individuals involved in narcotics
smuggling according to aguado the
trafficking organizations quote took
advantage of the anti-communist
sentiment which existed in Central
America and they undoubtedly used it for
drug trafficking end quote
referring to the
resupply operations aguado said the
traffickers used quote the same
connections the same air strips the same
people and maybe they said that it was
weapons for eatin Pastora and it was
actually drugs that would later go on to
the u.s. they fooled people
unfortunately this kind of activity
which is for the freeing of a people is
quite similar to the activities of the
drug traffickers and a quote Octavian o
say czar testified that when he dealt
with Morales he was quote thinking in
terms of the security of my country
it just didn't enter my mind that I
would become involved in such a mess
because it never entered into my mind to
get in that drug business I went a
couple of times inside in Nicaragua and
I saw people there young kids 15 16
years old they were carrying 30 40
rounds of ammunition against the
Sandinistas and that's why I did it
I'm not proud of it but I just didn't
have any choice
I mean the US Congress didn't give us
any choice they got these people into a
war the people went inside of Nicaragua
80 miles inside they had thousands of
supporters campesinos there helping them
now when those people retreat those
campesinos were murdered by the
Sandinistas i don't want that but that's
the reality of life end quote
in addition says-- are told the
subcommittee that he told a CIA officer
about morales and his offer to help the
contras quote Senator Kerry did you have
occasion to say to someone in the CIA
that you were getting money from him and
you were concerned he was a drug dealer
did you pass that information on to
somebody mister says AR yes I passed the
information on about the not that
relations well it was the relations and
the airplanes yes and the CIA people at
the American military attachs office
that were based in el upon go also and
any person or any plane landed there
they had to go
Senator Kerry and they basically said to
you that it was alright as long as you
don't deal in the powder is that correct
is that a fair quote mr. says AR yes end
quote
after the LA penka bombing of May 30th
1984 all assistance was cut off by the
CIA to our day while other contra groups
on both fronts continued to receive
support from the US government through a
variety of channels the United States
stated that the cut-off of our day was
related to the involvement of its
personnel and drug trafficking yet many
of the same drug traffickers who had
assisted our day were also assisting
other contra groups that continued to
receive funding Morales for example used
Geraldo Duran as one of his drug pilots
and Duran worked for Alfonso Ribeiro and
Fernando el Negro gemoro
who were associated with other contra
groups as well as for our day in a sworn
deposition which was taken in San Jose
Costa Rica by the subcommittee on
October 31st 1987 Caroll Preto Pastores
treasurer and procurement officer
vehemently denied allegations concerning
the personal involvement of our day
leadership in drug trafficking Preto
said that because of Pastores problems
with the US government it was his belief
that the CIA was attempting to discredit
the former sandanista comandante a and
his supporters in our day with
allegations that they were involved in
drug trafficking Tomas Castillo the
former CIA station chief in Costa Rica
who was indicted in connection with the
iran-contra affair testified before the
iran-contra committees that when the CIA
became aware of narcotics trafficking by
Pastores supporters and lieutenants
those individuals activities were
reported to law enforcement officials
however Morales continued to work with
the Contras until January 1986 he was
indicted for a second time in the
Southern District of Florida for a
January 1986 cocaine flight to Bahamas
and was
arrested on June 12th 1986 Morales
testified that he offered to cooperate
with the government soon after he was
arrested and that he was willing to take
a lie-detector test
he said his attorneys repeated the offer
on his behalf several times but on each
occasion the US attorney Leon Kilner
refused leon Kellner and richard gregory
then the head of the criminal division
of the miami US Attorney's office met
with the staff of the committee in
November 1986 they said that Morales
story was not credible and that Morales
was trying to get his sentence reduced
by cooperating with a Senate committee
as Morales had not yet been sentenced
both Kilner and Gregory discouraged the
staff from meeting with Morales at that
time and the staff respected their
request Kellner and Gregory said that
Morales was like the many Miami cocaine
traffickers who used the I was working
for the CIA defense following his
testimony before the subcommittee
Morales renewed his offer to work with
the government this time federal law
enforcement officials decided to accept
the offer morales provided the
government with leads that were used by
law enforcement authorities in
connection with matters remaining under
investigation in november 1988 the DEA
gave morales a lengthy polygraph
examination on his testimony before the
subcommittee and he was considered
truthful 7 john hole john hole was a
central figure in contra operations on
the southern front when they were
managed by oliver north from 1984
through late 1986 before that according
to former costa ricans CIA station chief
thomas Castillo's public testimony hole
had helped the CIA with military supply
and other operations on behalf of the
Contras in addition during the same
period hole received $10,000 a month
from Adolfo Calero of the fdn at North's
Direction hole is an Indiana
armored who lives in northern Costa Rica
he came to Costa Rica in the mid-1970s
and persuaded a number of North
Americans to invest in ranch land in the
northern part of the country using their
money and adding some of his own he
purchased thousands of acres of Costa
Rican farmland properties under his
ownership management or control
ultimately included at least six air
strips to the many pilots and
revolutionaries who passed through the
region this collection of properties and
air strips became known as John Hall's
ranch on March 23rd 1984 seven men
aboard a u.s. government-owned dc-3 were
killed when the cargo plane crashed near
hols ranch revealing publicly that whole
was allowing his property to be used for
air drops of supplies to the Contras but
even before this public revelation of
hulls role in supporting the Contras
officials in a variety of Latin American
countries were aware of holes activities
as a liaison between the Contras and the
United States government
Jose bland own testified for example the
former Costa Rican vice president Daniel
oh do bear suggested he land own meat
with whole in 1983 to discuss the
formation of a unified southern contra
command under Eden Pastora five
witnesses testified that whole was
involved in cocaine trafficking
Floyd Carlton Werner laughts Jose blende
own George Morales and Gary bets nur
Betts nur was the only witness who
testified that he was actually present
to witness cocaine being loaded onto
planes headed for the United States in
holes presence Watts said that drugs
were flown into Hall's ranch but that he
did not personally witness the flights
he said he heard about the drug flights
from the Colombian and Panamanian pilots
who allegedly flew drugs to holes air
strips Watts described the strips as
quote a stop for refuel basically the
aircraft would land there would be fuel
waiting for them and then
would depart they would come in with
weapons and drugs end quote
lots said that hole was paid for
allowing his air strips to be used as a
refueling stop two witnesses blend own
and Carlton recounted an incident
involving the disappearance of a
shipment of five hundred thirty eight
kilos of cocaine owned by the Pereira or
Cali cocaine cartel tefilo Watson a
member of Carlton's smuggling operation
was flying the plane to Costa Rica for
the cartel the plane crashed and Watson
was killed
the witnesses believed that the crash
occurred at hols ranch and the hole took
the shipment and bulldozed the plane a
Cessna 310 into the river
Carlton testified that the Colombians
were furious when they discovered the
cocaine missing he said they sent gunman
after hole and in fact kidnapped a
member of hulls family to force the
return of the cocaine when that failed
they became convinced that Carlton
himself stole the cocaine and they sent
gunmen after him the gunmen dug up
Carlton's property in Panama with a
backhoe looking for the lost cocaine and
Carlton fled for his life to Miami
Gary bets nur started flying former
Alice's drug smuggling Network in 1981
bets NAR testified that his first
delivery of arms to the Contras was in
1983 when he flew a dc-3 carrying
grenades and mines to Allah Pongo Air
Force Base in El Salvador his copilot on
the trip was Richard Healy who had flown
drugs for Morales bets nurse said the
weapons were unloaded at Allah Pongo by
Salvador and military personnel and an
American whom he assumed worked for the
US Department of Defense bets near
testified that he and Healy flew the
plane on to Colombia where they picked
up a load of marijuana and returned to
their base at great harbour Cay in the
Bahamas
according to bets nur the next contra
weapons and drugs flight took place in
July in 1984 Morales asked him
to fly a load of weapons two holes
wrench and to pick up a load of drugs
bets nerf luis cessna 402c - john halls
ranch
according to bets nur he was met at the
airstrip by Hull and they watched the
cargo of weapons being unloaded and
cocaine packed in 17 duffel bags and
five or six two-foot square boxes being
loaded into the now-empty Cessna bets
nur then flew the plane to a field at
Lakeland Florida yet another guns for
drugs flight was made two weeks later on
this trip vet's nurse said he flew a
panther to an airstrip called Los Llanos
about 10 miles from holes properties and
not far from the voice of America
transmitter in northern Costa Rica bets
nur testified that hall met him again
and the two watched while the weapons
were unloaded and approximately 500
kilos of cocaine and 17 duffel bags were
loaded for the return flight to Florida
hole became the subject of an
investigation by the US attorney for the
Southern District of Florida in the
spring of 1985 in late March 1985
assistant US attorney Jeffrey Feldman
and two FBI agents went to Costa Rica to
investigate Neutrality Act violations by
participants in the Contra resupply
network that were also under
investigation at the same time by
Senator Kerry both the Feldman and Kerry
inquiries had been prompted in part by
statements made to reporters by soldiers
of fortune in prison in Costa Rica who
alleged John hull was providing support
for the Contras with the help of the
national security council Feldman and
the FBI agents met with US ambassador to
Costa Rica Louis Thames and the CIA
chief of station
Tomas Castillo who told him John
whole-new Rob Owen and Oliver North and
gave the impression that hole had been
working for US interests prior to March
of 1984 in addition one of the embassy
security officers Jim Nagle told one of
the FBI agents accompanying Feldman that
regarding Feldman's inquiries quote
these were agencies with other
operational requirements and we
shouldn't interfere with the work of
these agencies end quote
when Feldman attempted to interview
whole Feldman learned that whole was
told by the embassy staff not to talk to
him without an attorney present
Feldman concluded the u.s. embassy
officials in Costa Rica were taking
active measures to protect whole after
Feldman interviewed two of the
mercenaries Peter glimmery and Stephen
Carr regarding their allegations of
holes involvement in criminal activity
Feldman learned that Kirk Cotulla Consul
in San Jose was quote trying to get car
and the rest of these people to recant
their statements regarding Hall's
involvement with the CIA and with any
other American agency Feldman added
quote it was apparent we were stirring
up some problem with our inquiries
concerning John Hall end quote
Feldman concluded that because hole was
receiving protection from some US
officials that it would not be possible
to interview him Feldman therefore took
no further steps to do so in an effort
to stop the investigation against him
and to cause the Justice Department to
instead investigate those urging an
investigation of whole whole prepared
falsified affidavits from jailed
mercenaries in Costa Rica to US Attorney
Kilner in the affidavits the mercenaries
accused congressional staff of paying
witnesses to invent stories about
illegal activities associated with the
clandestine contra supply network the
Justice Department ultimately concluded
that the affidavits had been forged
Kellner testified that he quote had
concerns about them and didn't believe
them end quote to this day the Justice
Department has taken no action against
John hull for obstruction of justice or
any related charge in connection with
his filing false affidavits with the US
Justice Department regarding the
congressional investigations in the
period in which he was providing support
to the Contras whole obtained a loan
from the overseas Private Investment
Corporation for $375,000 which
ultimately proved to have been obtained
with false documentation in 1983 hole
and two associates mr. William Crone and
mr. Alvaro Arroyo approached OPEC for a
loan to finance a joint venture wood
products factory it would make will
Barrow and axe handles for the US market
in fact according to testimony from
Crone and OPI sea officials no
contributions from whole Arroyo or
himself were made to the joint venture
on the basis of the application some
supporting documentation and a site
visit on March 30th 1984 OPI see
advanced $375,000
by the end of 1985 after one interest
payment the loan lapsed into default and
OPI see officials began to recognize
that the project was a fraud and that
hole had made false representations in
making the application to OPI see OPI
see officials found that the money which
was dispersed by their agency was
deposited in holes Indiana bank account
and the funds were withdrawn by hole in
cash
when OPI see inquired in 1986 as where
the funds were going hole told OPI see
officials that he would be using the
cash to buy Costa Rican money on the
black market to get a more favorable
exchange rate in fact Costa Rica has a
favorable exchange rate for foreign
investment and the excuse hole offered
does not make sense what appears to have
happened is that hole simply took the
money and as much as no equipment was
purchased for the factory no products
were shipped from it and holes partner
Kron testified that he never saw the
money indeed prospective purchasers
complained that they paid hole for
products in advance but never received
delivery on the basis of the subsequent
OPI see investigation of the loan to
holes company in April 1987 the case was
referred to
Justice Department for a criminal fraud
investigation while nothing has yet
happened for almost two years the
Justice Department maintains the
investigation is still ongoing OPI C
foreclosed on the properties which hole
had put up as collateral for the loan
following the foreclosure to recover
their monies OPI C sold the property at
auction however in order to prevent a
sale far below the market price OPI C
bid at the auction and wound up
purchasing its own property for 180
$7,500 OPI C then attempted to sell the
property directly an advertisement was
placed in The Wall Street Journal which
attracted a single offer from an
investment banker in Philadelphia an
agreement was negotiated whereby the
company purchasing the property from OPI
C was required to make no downpayment
and only to repay OPI C it's one hundred
eighty seven thousand five hundred
dollars from the future proceeds of the
sale of timber cut on the land the
corporation which purchased the property
has no other assets other than the land
if the agreement is fulfilled by the
purchasers of the land OPI C will
realize repayment of one hundred eighty
seven thousand five hundred dollars half
of the original $375,000 loaned to hold
the subcommittee also heard testimony
from investors who had allowed hole to
purchase property for them and then to
manage the property who testified that
he did not deliver on his promises he
failed to purchase the properties he
said he would and in one case took farm
equipment off a farm he was paid to
manage and converted it for his own use
in mid January 1989 hole was arrested by
Costa Rican law enforcement authorities
and charged with drug trafficking and
violating Costa Rica's neutrality 9 the
Sam
sisq frogman case und fr a n and p CNE
the san francisco frog man case was one
of the first cases in which allegations
linking specific contra organizations to
drug smugglers surfaced in a july 26th
1986 report to the Congress on contra
related narcotics allegations the State
Department described the frogman case as
follows quote this case gets its
nickname from swimmers who brought
cocaine ashore on the west coast from a
Colombian vessel in 1982 to 1983 it
focused on a major Colombian cocaine
smuggler
Alvaro Carbajal Minolta who supplied a
number of West Coast smugglers it was
alleged but never confirmed the
Nicaraguan citizen Horacio pereira an
associate of Carbajal had helped the
Nicaraguan resistance Pereira was
subsequently convicted on drug charges
in Costa Rica and sentenced to 12 years
imprisonment to other Nicaraguans carlos
cabezas and julio Zavala who were among
the jailed West Coast traffickers
convicted of receiving drugs from
Carbajal claimed long after their
conviction that they had delivered large
sums of money to resistance groups in
Costa Rica and that Pereira who was not
charged in the case has said the profits
from the drug sale would finance
resistance activities end quote
the allegations made by cabeza Sand
Zavala involved two southern front
contra groups und an F a RN a military
group associated with Fernando el Negro
Chamorro and PC any a contra political
group in the south cabeza
claimed that he helped move 25 to 30
kilos of cocaine from Costa Rica to San
Francisco generating 1.5 million dollars
according to cabeza
part of that money was given to Troy and
Fernando Sanchez to help Eden pastores
and Fernando el Negro Chamorros
operations on the southern front
in 1982 and 1983 after the trial the US
government returned 36,000 $20 seized
his drug money to one of the defendants
Zavala after he submitted letters from
contra leaders claiming the funds were
really their property the money that was
returned had been seized by the FBI
after being found in cash in a drawer at
Cevallos home with drug transaction
letters an m1 carbine a grenade and a
quantity of cocaine the subcommittee
found that the frogman arrests involved
cocaine from a Colombian source carbajal
Minolta in addition Zavala and cabeza s
had as a second source of supply
Nicaraguans living in Costa Rica
associated with the Contras FBI
documents from the frogman case
identified the Nicaraguans as Horacio
pereira troy o Sanchez and Fernando
Sanchez Pereira was convicted on cocaine
charges in Costa Rica in 1985 and
sentenced to 12 years in prison an
important member of the Pereira
organization was Sebastian Huashan
Gonzalez who also was associated with
our day in southern front contra
operations Robert Owen advised north in
February 1985 that Gonzalez was
trafficking in cocaine Jose bland own
testified that Eden Pastora
knew that Gonzalez was involved in drug
trafficking while he was working with
our day Gonzales later left the contra
network and fled from Costa Rica to
Panama where he went to work for general
Noriega during the Pereira trial
evidence was also presented by the Costa
Rica prosecutor showing that drug
traffickers had asked leader
Armando gemoro the brother of UD nfa RN
leader
Fernando el Negro tomorrow for
assistance with vehicles to transport
cocaine and for help with a Costa Rica
police official troy yo and Fernando
Sanchez were marginal participants in
the Contra move
and relatives of a member of the fdn
Directorate 10 the cuban-american
connection several groups of Miami based
Cuba Americans provided direct and
indirect support for the southern front
during the period that the Boland
amendment prohibited official US
government assistance their help which
included supplies and training was
funded in part with drug money the State
Department described the allegations in
its July 1986 report to Congress as
follows quote there have been
allegations that Rene Corbeau and other
Cuban Americans involved in anti
sandanista activities in Costa Rica were
connected with Miami based drug
traffickers Corbeau reportedly recruited
a group of Cuban American and Cuban
exile combatants and military trainers
in the Miami area who operated inside
Nicaragua and in the northern part of
Costa Rica two Cuban exiles in this
group Mario Reyes Lovaas and Ubaldo
Hernandez Perez were captured by the
Sandinistas in June 1986 they were
reportedly members of the UN OFA RN
group headed by fernando el negro gemoro
there is no information to substantiate
allegations that this group from Miami
has been a source of drug money for the
UN OFA RN or any other resistance
organization
end quote on may 6th 1986 committee
staff met with representatives of the
Justice Department FBI DEA CIA and State
Department to advise them of allegations
of gun running and drug trafficking in
connection with this group in August
1986 the committee requested information
from the Justice Department regarding
the allegations concerning Corbeau and
fellow Cuban Americans Felipe Vidal
frank castro and luis rodriguez and
frank chances two of the principles in
free terrific owes de puntarenas and
ocean hunter concerning their
involvement in
narcotics trafficking the Justice
Department refused to provide any
information in response to this request
on the grounds that the information
requested remained under active
investigation and that the committee's
quote rambling through open
investigations gravely risks
compromising those efforts end quote
less than three months earlier the
Justice Department had advised both the
press and the committee that the
allegations had been thoroughly
investigated and were without foundation
at no time did the Justice Department
disclose to the committee in response to
its inquiry that extensive information
had in fact been developed by the FBI
from 1983 through 1986 suggesting that
many of the allegations the committee
was investigating were true at the May
6th 1986 meeting with committee staff
the CIA categorically denied the weapons
had been shipped to the Contras from the
United States
on the flights involving Rene Corbeau
noting that the material on which they
were basing these assertions was
classified and suggested that the
allegations that had been made to the
contrary or the result of disinformation
in fact as the FBI had previously
learned from informants cuban-american
supporters of the Contras had shipped
weapons from South Florida to Allah
Pongo and from there to John holds air
strips in Costa Rica the persons
involved admitted to the FBI that they
had participated in such shipments
making general statements about them
beginning in 1985 on June 4th 1986 and
June 16th 1986 Rene Corbeau one of the
principles in the shipments explicitly
told the FBI that he had participated in
shipping weapons to the Contras in
violation of US neutrality laws the
Cuban American contingent supported the
Contra effort on the southern front work
with Pastora
until a May 30th 1984 bombing at la
penka after the assassination attempt on
Pastora they shifted their allegiance to
Fernando el Negro chamoy
ud nfa RN by mid-june 1984 the drug
smuggling through the southern front
zones controlled by the Contras had
grown sufficiently obvious that Robert
Owen warned lieutenant colonel oliver
north at the NSC that the quote cubans
are involved in drugs end quote
notes taken by Colonel Robert L Earl
during his tenure at the NSC described
how in August 1986 the CIA was worried
about quote disreputable characters in
the Cuban American community that are
sympathetic to the Contra cause but
causing more problems than help and that
one had to be careful in how one dealt
with the Cuban American community and
its relation to this that although their
motives were in the right place there
was a lot of corruption and greed and
drugs and it was a real mess
end quote in August 1988 Corbeau and
Castro were indicted in a Neutrality Act
case involving the Contras brought by
the US attorney for Miami and prosecuted
by assistant US attorney Jeffrey Feldman
no narcotics related allegations were
included in the August 1988 indictment
one of the three principals in free
Jerry fucose de puta reyes and ocean
hunter Luis Rodriguez was indicted on
drug charges in April 1988 the others
Frank Chainz and Moises Nunez
participated in Contra military
assistance operations in 1984 and 1985
Nunez was employed by both the drug
money laundering front free tarifa Coast
de puta Ramos and by Glen Robinette on
behalf of the succour North Enterprise
former CIA costa rica chief of station
thomas castillo told the iran-contra
committees that Nunez quote was involved
in a very sensitive operation end quote
for the enterprise eleven
Ramon Milian Rodriguez and Felix
Rodriguez a particularly controversial
allegation arose during the course of
the subcommittee's investigation this
involved Ramon Milian Rodriguez's
offered to assist the Contras following
his arrest for money laundering in a
June 25th 1987 closed session of the
subcommittee Milian Rodriguez testified
that in a meeting arranged by Miami
private detective Raul Diaz with Felix
Rodriguez he Milian offered to provide
drug money to the Contras Milian
Rodriguez stated that Felix accepted the
offer and ten million dollars in such
assistance was subsequently provided the
Contras through a system of secret
couriers Milian Rodriguez testified that
he also offered to assist in entrapping
the Sandinistas in a drug sting all in
return for dropping the charges then
pending against him Felix Rodriguez
strenuously denied Milian Rodriguez's
version of the meeting stating that he
reported Milian's offered to a number of
US government agencies including the FBI
and CIA no action was taken by those
agencies and Milian Rodriguez's case
went to trial Raul Diaz refused to
respond to a committee subpoena to
discuss his recollection of the meeting
therefore because of the difficulty the
subcommittee faced and ascertaining who
was telling the truth
Ramon Milian Rodriguez or Felix
Rodriguez Milian was asked whether he
would be willing to take a polygraph
examination he agreed to submit to an
examination on the question of providing
drug money to the Contras through Felix
Rodriguez Senator Kerry the subcommittee
chairman arranged for one of the
country's leading polygraph experts dr.
Donald Raskin of the University of Utah
to travel to Washington DC to administer
the test dr. Raskin administered a
partial examination of Milian Rodriguez
on June 3rd and 4th 1988 on two critical
questions Ramone million
Regas answers were determined to be
deceptive by dr. Raskin the questions
were as follows one did Felix Rodriguez
ask you to arrange deliveries of money
for the Contras during the meeting at
Raul's office answer yes - did you
arrange approximately five deliveries of
money for the Contras on the basis of
phone calls you personally received from
Felix Rodriguez answer yes on the third
question dr. Raskin could not determine
whether or not Ramon Milian Rodriguez
was being truthful in his response the
question was as follows three did you
arrange the deliveries of at least five
million dollars for the Contras using
the procedures that you and Felix worked
out answer yes
at that point million Rodriguez stated
that he did not want to continue the
examination based upon dr. raskins oral
evaluation of Ramon Milian Rodriguez the
Chairman concluded that his version of
the meeting with Felix Rodriguez and his
subsequent relationship with Felix and
providing drug money for the Contras was
not truthful
the Chairman reached no conclusion
regarding the issue of whether Ramon
Milian arranged for the deliveries of at
least five million dollars for the
Contras during Felix Rodriguez's public
testimony before the subcommittee on
July 14 1988 Senator Carey stated that
he did not believe Ramon Millia and
Rodriguez's version of the meeting was
truthful
however million Rodriguez's testimony
regarding the cartels general Noriega
z-- role in narco trafficking and his
involvement in setting up companies
which were later used to support the
Contras was corroborated by a number of
witnesses including Jose bland own Floyd
Carlton Gerald lobe and a Miami attorney
who had supplied information on the
cartels in a closed session deposition
in addition million Rodriguez's
testimony on many of these points was
corroborated by extensive documentary
evidence
and by grand jury statements by his
partners in federal criminal proceedings
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you